Hi friends
In this video we are going to learn how to
search a node in a singly linked list
So we have a singly linked list with four nodes
with values 10 20 30 and 40
And this is the code to implement the program the
function searchNode will be doing the search operation and
returns the result of the search
We are passing the head of the linked list and
the key to be searched into the function. First the
address of the head node which is 1024 here
is stored in temp
Now this while loop is used to traverse and check
if the node is the key If the key is found
then the function returns one and if the key is
not found then it returns minus one
Here we are searching for element 30 So key equal
to 30 here first we check If temp which is
pointing to head is null If it is null it
means we have reached the end of the linked lists
and it does not enter the while loop here
temp equal to 1024 which is not equal to null
So enter the loop now check If the data at address
1024 is the key so compare 10 with 30
But it is not the same so
If condition is failed so jump to the next statement
temp equal to temp Next
Now temp will be holding the next node address which
is 2024
So temp now points to the second node again
The while condition is checked temp equal to 2024
which is not equal to null So enter the loop
now compare 20 with 30 But it's not
the same value
So if condition again failed so it jumps to the
next statement and temp will now point to the next
node at 3024 now again check if
temp has become null no So enter the while loop
check
If data at 3024 is equal to the key so
compare the data 30 with the key 30 both are
the same
So if condition is true here so it will return
one which means key is found
So this is how it is working
Now let us see Another case where search key is
not found so let the key to be searched be
100 first The head address which is 1024 here
is stored in temp and we have the while condition
temp not equal to null and temp is 1024
here which is not equal to null
So enter the loop now check If the data at
address 1024 is the key so compare 10 with 100
But the comparison returns a false So if condition fails
so jump to the next statement temp equal to temp
next
Now temp will be holding the next node address which
is 2024 So temp now points to the second node
Now again we have temp equal to 2024 which
is not equal to null So while condition is true
so enter the loop and check if node two is
holding 100 But the comparison is returning a false and
the if condition failed So temp will now point to
the next node at 3024 again check the while
condition 3024 is not equal to null so
enter the loop compare the data at 3024 with the
key But we have 30 and the key is 100 which
are not same
So if condition failed again and Temp will now point
to the next node at 4024 again check the
while condition 4024 is not equal to null so
enter the loop and compare 40 with 100
It is not the same
So if condition failed again and temp equal to temp
next what is the next value of node 4 it
is null so null will be stored in the temp
Now we have the while condition again but we have
temp equal to null
So the while condition is failed and it will return
minus one which means the key is not found
So that's it
Now let us talk about the time complexity The
best case is when the search key is present in the
first node itself So while loop need to execute only
once So the best case time complexity will be
order of one
The worst case is when the search key is present
in the last node So while loop will work n
times if you have n nodes So the worst case time complexity will be O(n)